ref field updates (#6209)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/low-level-struct-improvements.md

}
```

> A `readonly` on a `ref struct` will instance will force `ref` fields to be `readonly ref readonly`. This also means a `readonly ref struct` must mark `ref` fields as `readonly ref readonly`. This maintains the invariant that a `ref struct` which is `readonly` cannot store ref-like state.

Reviewer: >will instance [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=31&length=13)

Typo?

> A `readonly` on a `ref struct` will instance will force `ref` fields to be `readonly ref readonly`. This also means a `readonly ref struct` must mark `ref` fields as `readonly ref readonly`. This maintains the invariant that a `ref struct` which is `readonly` cannot store ref-like state.

Reviewer 2: >A `readonly` on a `ref struct` will instance will force `ref` fields to be `readonly ref readonly`. This also means a `readonly ref struct` must mark `ref` fields as `readonly ref readonly`. [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=0&length=190)

The first two sentences in this paragraph seem near-duplicates

Author: The first is describing how `readonly` on a value will impact `ref` fields, the other is describing how `readonly` on a declaration will do so. Let me try and clean that up a bit.

```c#

> ref struct S

Reviewer 2: This code snippet doesn't seem related to the previous paragraph. Consider adding a blurb to explain the general rule for `ref` vs. `ref readonly`/`in` parameters.

{
    ref int Field;

    void Uses(in S s1, ref S s2)
    {
        int local = default;

>         s1.Field = 42;          // Error: can't assign ref readonly value

Reviewer: >s1.Field = 42; [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=8&length=14)

Does the `ref readonly`-ness apply through properties as well? For instance:
```csharp
ref int Property => ref Field;
...
s1.Property = 42;
```

Author: For properties or methods it depends on the type of `this`. In a `readonly` property or method `this` is `ref readonly` hence all `ref` fields will be `ref readonly`.

>         s1.Field = ref loal;    // Error: can't repoint readonly ref

Reviewer: >loal [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=23&length=4)

`local` here and below?

Author: Embarrassing ...

<a name="rules-field-lifetimes"></a>

> An lvalue designating a reference to a field, e.F, is *ref-safe-to-escape* (by reference) as follows:
> 1. If `F` is a `ref` field its *ref-safe-to-escape* scope is the *safe-to-escape* scope of `e`.
> 2. Else if `e` is of a reference type, it has *ref-safe-to-escape* of *calling method*

> > 3. Else its *ref-safe-to-escape* is taken from the *ref-safe-to-escape* of `e`.

Author: Rules 1 and 2 were redundant so collapsed them

> For a ref reassignment in the form ...
> 1. `x.e1 = ref e2`: where `x` is *safe-to-escape* to *calling method* then `e2` must be *ref-safe-to-escape* to the *calling method*

> > 2. `e1 = ref e2`: where `e1` is a `ref` local or parameter then `e2` must have a *ref-safe-to-escape* at least as big as the *ref-safe-to-escape* of `e1`.

Author: No change here. Just tried to get the language consistent between the rules.

Reviewer 3: My issue with using "big" here is that in the implementation, smaller numbers are used to represent "wider", also known as "bigger" scopes. :)

Author: It is unfortunate that the original implementation occurred before the spec and the spec didn't re-use the implementation language. When we look at cleaning up the ref saftey implementation in MQ we should also think a lot about getting the language in sync with the spec.

> > 2. `e1 = ref e2`: where `e1` is a `ref` local or parameter then `e2` must have a *ref-safe-to-escape* at least as big as the *ref-safe-to-escape* of `e1`.

Reviewer: >`ref` local or parameter [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=36&length=24)

Perhaps "`ref` local or `ref` parameter" if that is what is intended here, just to be extra clear.

> > 2. `e1 = ref e2`: where `e1` is a `ref` local or parameter then `e2` must have a *ref-safe-to-escape* at least as big as the *ref-safe-to-escape* of `e1`.

Reviewer: >big [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=116&length=3)

Consider reverting to "wide" for consistency with other statements in this spec and span-safety.md which use "narrow" or "wide".

}
```

The span safety rules will be written in terms of `scoped ref` and `ref`. For span safety purposes an `in` parameter is equivalent to `ref` and `out` is equivalent to `scoped ref`. Both `in` and `out` will only be specifically called out when it is important to the semantic of the rule. Otherwise they are just considered `ref` and `scoped ref` respectively. 

> When discussing the *ref-safe-to-escape* of arguments that correspond to `in` parameters they will be generalized as `ref` arguments in the spec. In the case the argument is an lvalue then the *ref-safe-to-escape* is that of the lvalue, otherwise it is *current method*. Again `in` will only be called out here when it is important to the semantic of the current rule.

Author: I continued to be frustrated at having to call `in` out differently than `ref` in a couple of places. Hoping to fix that by clarifying that the *ref-safe-to-escape* of `in` changes based on whether it's an lvalue or compiler generated temp. Allowed me to remove `in` language from a few places.

Reviewer 3: I didn't understand why we needed a distinction for a compiler-generated temp. It's just another local variable, right?

Author: The spec often refers to the *ref-safe-to-escape* of the `ref` argument. In the case we're referring to `in` though it could be the expression or the compiler generated temp. I think it's understood it's 99% talking about "what we actually pass" vs. "what is actually typed in the editor" but it's a spec so need to be specific.

> An lvalue resulting from a ref-returning method invocation `e1.M(e2, ...)` is *ref-safe-to-escape* the smallest of the following scopes:
> 1. The *calling method*

> > 2. The *ref-safe-to-escape* contributed byall `ref` arguments

Reviewer: >byall [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=42&length=5)

Typo: "by all"

> > 2. The *ref-safe-to-escape* contributed byall `ref` arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. The *ref-safe-to-escape* contributed by all `ref` arguments
```

> An lvalue resulting from a ref-returning method invocation `e1.M(e2, ...)` is *ref-safe-to-escape* the smallest of the following scopes:
> 1. The *calling method*
> 2. The *ref-safe-to-escape* contributed by all `ref` arguments
> 3. The *safe-to-escape* contributed by all argument expressions

The method invocation for rvalue returns needs to change as follows to account for `ref` field returns.

> An rvalue resulting from a method invocation `e1.M(e2, ...)` is *safe-to-escape* from the smallest of the following scopes:
> 1. The *calling method*

> > 2. The *safe-to-escape* conrtibuted by all argument expressions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> 2. The *safe-to-escape* contributed by all argument expressions
```

<a name="rules-method-arguments-must-match"></a>

> The presence of `ref` fields means the rules around method arguments must match need to be updated as a `ref` parameter can now be stored as fields in a `ref struct` argument to the method. Previously the rule only had to consider other `ref struct` being stored as fields. The impact of this is discussed in [the compat considerations](#compat-considerations). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The presence of `ref` fields means the rules around method arguments must match need to be updated as a `ref` parameter can now be stored as a field in a `ref struct` argument to the method. Previously the rule only had to consider another `ref struct` being stored as a field. The impact of this is discussed in [the compat considerations](#compat-considerations). 
```

The presence of `scoped` allows us to refine the rule to reduce the friction the rule creates. The `scoped` modifier lets us remove arguments from consideration as they cannot be returned from the method.

The updated rule is:

> For a method invocation if there is an argument for a `ref`, `scoped ref` or `out` parameter of a `ref struct` type where the argument has *safe-to-escape* E1 then 
> 1. No `ref struct` argument may contribute a narrower *safe-to-escape* than E1.
> 2. No `ref` or `in` argument may contribute a narrower *ref-safe-to-escape* than E1.
>
> This rule does not apply to `ref struct` arguments for `in` parameters

Impact of this change is discussed more deeply [below](#examples-method-arguments-must-match). Overall this will allow developers to make call sites more flexible by annotating non-escaping ref-like values with `scoped`.

> The `scoped` modifier on parameters also impacts our OHI and `delegate` conversion rules. The signature for an override, interface implementation or `delegate` conversion can: 

Reviewer: >OHI [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=53&length=3)

Consider using "overriding and interface implementation" instead. It would avoid introducing a new "OHI" term, and also `scoped` does not affect hiding.

Author: Tried to clear this up.

<a name="rules-method-arguments-must-match"></a>

> The presence of `ref` fields means the rules around method arguments must match need to be updated as a `ref` parameter can now be stored as a field in a `ref struct` argument to the method. Previously the rule only had to consider another `ref struct` being stored as a field. The impact of this is discussed in [the compat considerations](#compat-considerations). 

Reviewer 2: >The presence of `ref` fields means the rules around method arguments must match need to be updated [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=0&length=98)

"The presence of `ref` fields means the rules around method arguments must match need to be updated ..."
This part of the sentence seems incomplete (I couldn't parse it).

Author: The docs uses the non `-` form for this.

Reviewer 2: The other places with "method arguments must match" were not as hard to parse.
Consider: "... means the method arguments must match rule ..."

The presence of `scoped` allows us to refine the rule to reduce the friction the rule creates. The `scoped` modifier lets us remove arguments from consideration as they cannot be returned from the method.

The updated rule is:

> For a method invocation if there is an argument for a `ref`, `scoped ref` or `out` parameter of a `ref struct` type where the argument has *safe-to-escape* E1 then 
> 1. No `ref struct` argument may contribute a narrower *safe-to-escape* than E1.
> 2. No `ref` or `in` argument may contribute a narrower *ref-safe-to-escape* than E1.
>
> This rule does not apply to `ref struct` arguments for `in` parameters

Impact of this change is discussed more deeply [below](#examples-method-arguments-must-match). Overall this will allow developers to make call sites more flexible by annotating non-escaping ref-like values with `scoped`.

The `scoped` modifier on parameters also impacts our OHI and `delegate` conversion rules. The signature for an override, interface implementation or `delegate` conversion can: 
- Add `scoped` to a `ref` or `in` parameter
- Add `scoped` to a `ref struct` parameter 

> Any other difference with respect to `scoped` will be considered an error.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to add that overloads differing only by `scoped` are errors.
